Feature blog for KEP-3017: Unhealthy Pod Eviction Policy for PDBs (#37627)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2023-01-06-unhealthy-pod-eviction-policy-for-pdb.md

when all pods of an application are unhealthy. Draining of a node cannot make any progress
in that case.

On the other hand there are users that depend on the existing behavior, in order to:
- prevent data-loss that would be caused by deleting pods that are guarding an underlying resource or storage
- achieve the best availability possible for their application

Kubernetes 1.26 introduced a new experimental field to the PodDisruptionBudget API: `.spec.unhealthyPodEvictionPolicy`.
When enabled, this field lets you support both of those requirements.

## How does it work?

API-initiated eviction is the process that triggers graceful pod termination.
The process can be initiated either by calling the API directly,
by using a kubectl drain command, or other actors in the cluster.
During this process every pod removal is consulted with appropriate PDBs,
to ensure that a sufficient number of pods is always running in the cluster.

The following policies allow PDB authors to have a greater control how the process deals with unhealthy pods.

There are two policies `IfHealthyBudget` and `AlwaysAllow` to choose from.

> The former, `IfHealthyBudget`, follows the existing behavior to achieve the best availability

Reviewer: Even though this does match the current behavior, I'd add a one sentence how it works. Something like:

Unhealthy pods can be disrupted only if the applications has a minimum available `.status.desiredHealthy` number of pods.

---
layout: blog

> title: "Eviction policy for unhealthy pods guarded by PodDisruptionBudgets"

Author: I have put the `Kubernetes 1.26` just for now. I like the rest ` Configure How PodDisruptionBudgets Affect Unhealthy Pods` , but I am wondering if we could/should mention the eviction part as well?

date: 2023-01-06
slug: "unhealthy-pod-eviction-policy-for-pdbs"
---

**Authors:** Filip Křepinský (Red Hat), Morten Torkildsen (Google), Ravi Gudimetla (Apple)

> 

Reviewer: @atiratree maybe something like:

Ensuring the disruptions to your applications do not affect its availability isn't a simple task. With 
the introduction of Unhealthy Pod Eviction Policy for Pod Disruption Budgets this is going to change. 
In this article, we will dive deeper into what modifications were introduced in PDBs to give application 
owners greater flexibility in managing disruptions.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Ensuring the disruptions to your applications do not affect its availability isn't a simple
task. With the introduction of _unhealthy pod eviction policy_ for PodDisruptionBudgets,
the way you can ensure this has changed again.
In this article, we will dive deeper into what modifications were introduced for PDBs to
give application owners greater flexibility in managing disruptions.

```
?

> 

Author: @soltysh thanks for the suggestion. I have added it there, with the link to PDBs.

>  With the introduction of _unhealthy pod eviction policy_ for PodDisruptionBudgets,
the way you can ensure this has changed again.

@sftim not sure what his is trying to say. Can we keep Maciej's version?

> Please also mention that this is describing a feature released last month, ie December 2022.

Do we need to mention the time, when we specify the version in the title?

> 

Reviewer 2: Not sure what you mean by time? We don't need to be precise to the hour.

> 

Author: sorry, I meant the date and not the time. I have rewritten the `going to change` part. Please let me know if you have something better in mind.

> 

Author: and we also mention the k8s version in the `What problems does this solve?` section

## What problems does this solve?

> Eviction of pods respects Pod Disruption Budgets (PDBs). This means that the eviction of a pod

Reviewer: Link to https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/disruptions/#pod-disruption-budgets

Reviewer 2: If making the change suggested in https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/37627/files#r1053221368, you could put the link there instead.

Author: added the link to the intro

should not disrupt a guarded application and `.status.currentHealthy` of a PDB should not fall 
bellow `.status.desiredHealthy`. Running pods that are [Unhealthy](/docs/tasks/run-application/configure-pdb/#healthiness-of-a-pod)
do not count towards the PDB status, but eviction of these is only possible in case the application
is not disrupted. This helps disrupted or not yet started application to achieve availability
as soon as possible without additional downtime that would be caused by evictions.

Unfortunately, this poses a problem for cluster administrators that would like to drain nodes
without any manual interventions. Misbehaving applications with pods in `CrashLoopBackOff`
state (due to a bug or misconfiguration) or pods that are simply failing to become ready
make this task much harder.

On the other hand there are users that depend on the current behavior to:
- prevent data-loss that would be caused by deleting pods that are guarding an underlying resource or storage
- achieve the best availability possible for their application

> We are introducing a new field `spec.unhealthyPodEvictionPolicy` for PDBs to support both of these requirements.

Author: Added suggestion. 

Somebody could manage that, but it is not advisable in general since only the application owner would know if that is okay.

## How does it work?

There are two policies `IfHealthyBudget` and `AlwaysAllow` to choose from. 
The former conforms to the original behavior to achieve the best availability.

> This will be also used when no policy is specified.

Author: I guess, it is a good idea to suggest this. I have made small modifications to your text.

By setting `AlwaysAllow` policy to the `spec.unhealthyPodEvictionPolicy` field of your PDB, 
you are choosing the best effort availability for your application.
This will make it easier to maintain and upgrade your clusters.

> Eviction API will consider these policies when eviction of a pod that is guarded by a PDB is requested. 

Author: I am not sure if I follow.

we are describing the behaviour of the default IfHealthyBudget in the section above with.

```
Eviction of pods respects PodDisruptionBudgets (PDBs). This means that the eviction of a pod
should not disrupt a guarded application and `.status.currentHealthy` of a PDB should not fall 
below `.status.desiredHealthy`. Running pods that are [Unhealthy](/docs/tasks/run-application/configure-pdb/#healthiness-of-a-pod)
do not count towards the PDB status, but eviction of these is only possible in case the application
is not disrupted. This helps disrupted or not yet started application to achieve availability
as soon as possible without additional downtime that would be caused by evictions.
```

or are you suggesting we should describe the edge cases of Eviction API?

> Eviction API will consider these policies when eviction of a pod that is guarded by a PDB is requested. 

Reviewer 2: If:
- you have a workload with _n_ Pods
- you protect the workload with a PodDisruptionBudget
- you choose, or default to, `IfHealthyBudget`
- several of those Pods are in CrashLoopBackoff

and you then
- (attempt to) drain a node where the CrashLoopBackoffs are happening

what actually happens? It'd be good to summarise this mainly in terms of `kubectl drain`, but readers might also want to know at API level. For example: you try to create an eviction, and that request fails with error 418, `I'm a teapot` (OK, probably not that specific error code).

My ask here is to explain the outcome that you _don't_ see if you enable the feature gate and set a custom `unhealthyPodEvictionPolicy`, so that readers can appreciate the benefit.

> Eviction API will consider these policies when eviction of a pod that is guarded by a PDB is requested. 

Author: I see, I have tried to put more details to describe the behavior.

```
Unfortunately, this poses a problem for cluster administrators that would like to drain nodes
without any manual interventions. Misbehaving applications with pods in `CrashLoopBackOff`
state (due to a bug or misconfiguration) or pods that are simply failing to become ready
make this task much harder. Any eviction request will fail due to violation of a PDB, 
when all pods of an application are unhealthy. Draining of a node cannot make any progress
in that case.
```

Do you think it make sense to describe the exact message and http code here?

> Eviction API will consider these policies when eviction of a pod that is guarded by a PDB is requested. 

Reviewer 2: At this point, you should describe _something_. I haven't tried the feature out so I don't know what you need to say. I don't think “Eviction API will consider these policies when eviction of a pod that is guarded by a PDB is requested.” feels like enough.

That said, if we had to we could merge this and live with the confusion.

> Eviction API will consider these policies when eviction of a pod that is guarded by a PDB is requested. 

Author: Thx for the suggestion, I used part of it and reorganized the section: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/compare/4629fb1dcda1ab70deaed7a30f89228d0d1fbb6d..e27c6086386bcbdc67b52cf7c9909d3c5caf788d.

I think we should not mention the node-pressure eviction here, since it could distract from the main topic. The node-pressure eviction does not abide by the PDBs. I have tried to highlight that we are dealing with the API initiated eviction.

## How do I use it?

This is an alpha feature, and you have to switch on the feature gate to enable it with the command line flag `--feature-gates=PDBUnhealthyPodEvictionPolicy=true` on `kube-apiserver`.

Deploy an nginx application with `app: nginx` label.

> Create a PDB with `AlwaysAllow` policy to guard this application.

Author: +1 for describing it more. But I wouldn't go as far as to suggest `you know that this app doesn't manage local
state` since this appies only to a subset of such applications.

I have put `You want to limit avoidable disruption, and you know that best effort availability is sufficient for this app.` there instead.

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes 1.26: Eviction policy for unhealthy pods guarded by PodDisruptionBudgets"
date: 2023-01-06
slug: "unhealthy-pod-eviction-policy-for-pdbs"
---

**Authors:** Filip Křepinský (Red Hat), Morten Torkildsen (Google), Ravi Gudimetla (Apple)

Ensuring the disruptions to your applications do not affect its availability isn't a simple
task. With the introduction of _unhealthy pod eviction policy_ for [PodDisruptionBudgets](/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/disruptions/#pod-disruption-budgets) (PDBs),

> this is going to change.

Reviewer 2: ”going to change” is what puzzles me. 1.26 is already out.

Author: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/37627#discussion_r1060182380

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
has changed.
```

That's a simple rewrite; you can use other words, so long as we avoid the incorrect use of future tense.

Author: using the other option now: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/37627#discussion_r1060794688

> task. With the introduction of _unhealthy pod eviction policy_ for [PodDisruptionBudgets](/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/disruptions/#pod-disruption-budgets) (PDBs),
> this is going to change.

Reviewer 2: Another option:
```suggestion
task. Last month's release of Kubernetes v1.26 lets you specify an  _unhealthy pod eviction policy_
for [PodDisruptionBudgets](/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/disruptions/#pod-disruption-budgets) (PDBs)
to help you maintain that availability during node management operations.

```

Author: +1, changed to this

In this article, we will dive deeper into what modifications were introduced for PDBs to
give application owners greater flexibility in managing disruptions.

## What problems does this solve?

> Eviction of pods respects PodDisruptionBudgets (PDBs). This means that the eviction of a pod

Reviewer 2: (nit / optional change)
```suggestion
Eviction of pods respects PodDisruptionBudgets (PDBs). This means that a
[voluntary disruption](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/#pod-disruption)
to a Pod
```

Author: I suppose we could link that. What do you think about still having the eviction mentioned there?

```
This means that a requested [voluntary disruption](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/#pod-disruption)
via an eviction to a Pod, should not disrupt a guarded application and `.status.currentHealthy` of a PDB should not fall
below `.status.desiredHealthy`
```
